---
title:  2022-07-05
tags:
programming-languagues:
created: 2022-07-05
---
# 2022-07-05
---
## BFD Front End
A BFD has type `bfd`. Using BFD consists of making references through the BFD and to data in the BFD.

### COFF
Stands for **Common Object File Format**.

It replaced the previously used `a.out` format.

### Relocations
They are left alone until required, then read in en-mass and translated into an internal form. They are maintained on a per section basis, while symbols are maintained on a per BFD basis.

All that the back end has to do to fit the BFD interface is to create a `struct reloc_cache_entry` for each relocation in a particular section, and fill in the right bits of the structure.

### Howto
The **howto** field can be imagined as a relocation instruction. It is a pointer to a structure which contains information on what to do with all of the other information in the reloc record and data section. A back end would normally have a relocation instruction set and turn relocations into pointers to the correct structure on input.

### Writing Relocations
The back end steps through the canonical relocation table and creates an `internal_reloc`. The symbol index to use is removed from the `offset` field in the symbol table supplied. The address comes directly from the sum of the section base address and the relocation offset.

The type is dug directly from the `howto` field. Then the `internal_reloc` is swapped into the shape of an `external_reloc` and written out to disk.

### Reading Relocations
The internal form of relocation is `arelent`.

Reading a coff relocation table is done in the following stages:
- Read the entire relocation table into memory.
- Process each relocation in turn; first swap it from the external to the internal form.
- Turn the symbol referenced in the relocation's symbol index into a pointer into the canonical symbol table. The back end will call that routine and save the result if a canonicalisation hasn't been done.
- The reloc index is turned into a pointer to a howto structure, in a back end specific way. For instance, the **386** and **960** use the `r_type` to directly produce an index into a howto table vector; the **88k** subtracts a number from the `r_type` field and creates an addend field.