---
title:  "2022 08 18"
tags:
  - work
programming-languagues:
created: 2022-08-18
---
Hello Robin,

Thanks for reporting this issue.

We've taken a look at it and it seems to be an issue with the latest development Newlib that doesn't show up in GCC testing. We've gone back and checked that this issue doesn't exist in a recent newlib release, and indeed if we use that library instead we are able to build the core-v-verif hello world file.

As such we've built an updated set of binaries that work in this case: https://files.embecosm.com/s/yS3zDdAofpX87aM (corev-openhw-zc-gcc-centos7-20220818.tar.xz). Only newlib here has changed, everything else is the same as it was for the tools we provided earlier in the week.

Hopefully this works on your end, but if you find any more issues, please let us know and we'll look into them.

Kind Regards,
Pietra

---

We have investigated the issue and we found that, since early this year, Newlib modified the way they substitute `@NEWLIB_MAJOR_VERSION@`. 

```
The following sources were used in this build:

build-scripts: ac59ec3716347e3b09cadc3494b3252f6d5d7a8e (git@github.com:embecosm/embecosm-toolchain-releases.git)
newlib: 415fdd4279b85eeec9d54775ce13c5c412451e08 (https://sourceware.org/git/newlib-cygwin.git)
gcc: 19c344a2f780bcd009a6a9eeb781d19ea21efd52 (git@github.com:pietraferreira/corev-gcc.git)
binutils-gdb: fdd02d93bd756830ff0854cb0704c89c8b7a4f93 (git@github.com:pietraferreira/corev-binutils-gdb.git)
binutils-gdb-sim: 18ea42a432d16db09fbed5bc9e60b4e3b7c2caa7 (git@github.com:embecosm/riscv-binutils-gdb.git)
```

---

Thanks, Pietra. That solved the problem.

Unfortunately, I am seeing yet another problem.
This is the error message "/work/ropeders/src/core-v-verif-40s/cv32e40s/bsp/syscalls.c:45:5: error: token "@" is not valid in preprocessor expressions".
That file uses "__NEWLIB__" included via "sys/stat.h" -> "_ansi.h" -> "newlib.h" -> "_newlib_version.h" -> "#define __NEWLIB__ @NEWLIB_MAJOR_VERSION@".

In case it helps you in any way to compile the core-v-verif hello world elf yourself, I am including a minimal setup for how to do it at the end of this email.

Regards Robin.


Clone ["https://github.com/openhwgroup/core-v-verif"](https://github.com/openhwgroup/core-v-verif).
Optionally, change branch to "cv32e40s/dev" (shouldn't matter).
Go to "core-v-verif/cv32e40s/sim/uvmt/".
Set the variable "export CV_SW_TOOLCHAIN=<your install>/corev-openhw-zc-gcc-centos7-20220816".
And the variable "export CV_SW_PREFIX=riscv32-corev-elf-".
And the variable "export CV_SIMULATOR=xrun".
Run "make hex TEST=hello-world".
(Hopefully that is all, unless I unknowingly have something implicit in my setup.)