---
title: "2022-08-17"
tags:
  - work
  - work/cobra
programming-languagues:
created: 2022-08-17
---
# 2022-08-17
---
## Cobra Tasks
- Fix Issues:
    - Jump table located incorrectly
    - Relaxation (Charlie has submitted a PR)
    - (GCC) Incorrect version

Then we can test the linker.

Test Charlie's patch.

Zc.lbu and so on, for half-words only the odd ones are being accepted.

We would need to fix them to be able to incorporate our changes upstream.

We need to make sure from now on we use a **stable** newlib and not upstream.

I'm not sure about this one but we might have to work on some documentation. The reason I'm unsure is because the Zc\* docs should be probably be revised before anything is added. Might be our job to do that but as of right now I don't think it is a priority.

## Everest
- ComRV support.

- Update toolchain build scripts, including:
    - Checkout different branches
    - Build separate binutils and gdb
- Build toolchain and make sure it runs (cti - common testing infrastructure)
- Put in Jenkins

Internal Embecosm WD/ComRV Demo page to use CTI.

The build script is missing the right branches and not checking out binutils and gdb separately.
> [!failure]- Failure 
>   Error: There is another generation process
>   
>   - plugin:obsidian-textgenerator-plugin:56949 TextGenerator.eval
>     plugin:obsidian-textgenerator-plugin:56949:31
>   
>   - Generator.next
>   
>   - plugin:obsidian-textgenerator-plugin:78 eval
>     plugin:obsidian-textgenerator-plugin:78:61
>   
>   - new Promise
>   
>   - plugin:obsidian-textgenerator-plugin:62 __async
>     plugin:obsidian-textgenerator-plugin:62:10
>   
>   - plugin:obsidian-textgenerator-plugin:56935 TextGenerator.generate
>     plugin:obsidian-textgenerator-plugin:56935:12
>   
>   - plugin:obsidian-textgenerator-plugin:58440 AutoSuggest.eval
>     plugin:obsidian-textgenerator-plugin:58440:52
>   
>   - Generator.next
>   
>   - plugin:obsidian-textgenerator-plugin:78 eval
>     plugin:obsidian-textgenerator-plugin:78:61
>   
>   - new Promise
>   
>  
